docs(cost-insights): add Amazon Redshift support (#9100)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/explore/cost-insights.md

dbt sums this across all overlapping windows to get `usage_per_query`.
</Expandable>

<Expandable alt_header="Amazon Redshift">

Cost Insights supports both Amazon Redshift Serverless and provisioned cluster deployments. dbt detects your deployment type automatically when testing the connection.

- **Redshift Serverless**

>     dbt estimates cost by identifying which RPU billing periods overlap with each query's execution time and attributing the proportional share of RPU-hours to the query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    dbt estimates cost by identifying which Redshift Processing Unit (RPU) billing periods overlap with each query's execution time and attributing the proportional share of RPU-hours to the query.
```

    Formula:
    ```
    rpu_hours_per_query * rpu_price_per_hour
    ```

    Where:
    - `rpu_hours_per_query` - RPU-hours attributed to the query based on its proportional overlap with each billing period. dbt sources billing period data from `SYS_SERVERLESS_USAGE`. For more information, see the [Amazon Redshift documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/redshift/latest/mgmt/serverless-billing.html).

>     - `rpu_price_per_hour` - Your RPU price per hour (from your configured value in Cost Insights settings).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - `rpu_price_per_hour` - Your RPU price per hour (from your configured value in [Cost Insights settings](/docs/explore/set-up-cost-insights#configure-cost-insights-settings-optional)).
```

- **Redshift Provisioned**

    dbt estimates cost based on how long each query ran and how many nodes your cluster has.

    Formula:
    ```
    elapsed_time_hours * node_count * node_price_per_hour
    ```

    Where:
    - `elapsed_time_hours` - Query execution time in hours. dbt sources this from `SYS_QUERY_HISTORY`.
    - `node_count` - Number of nodes in your cluster. dbt sources this from `STV_SLICES`.

>     - `node_price_per_hour` - Your price per node per hour (from your configured value in Cost Insights settings).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - `node_price_per_hour` - Your price per node per hour (from your configured value in [Cost Insights settings](/docs/explore/set-up-cost-insights#configure-cost-insights-settings-optional)).
```

**Additional considerations:**

> - **Data retention**: Redshift system tables (`SYS_QUERY_HISTORY`, `SYS_SERVERLESS_USAGE`) retain only 7 days of history. Cost data for Redshift may cover a shorter window than other warehouses. dbt calculates costs for whatever data is available within that window.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Data retention**: Redshift system tables (`SYS_QUERY_HISTORY`, `SYS_SERVERLESS_USAGE`) retain only seven days of history. Cost data for Redshift may cover a shorter window than other warehouses. dbt calculates costs for whatever data is available within that window.
```

- **Pricing required**: There are no default price values for Redshift. Costs will appear as $0 until you configure `rpu_price_per_hour` (serverless) or `node_price_per_hour` (provisioned) in [Cost Insights settings](/docs/explore/set-up-cost-insights#configure-cost-insights-settings-optional).

> :::note

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::info Concurrent query costs
```

> Redshift cost attribution is per-query standalone — each query is attributed cost as if it exclusively occupied the cluster for its duration. When queries run concurrently, the sum of query-level costs may exceed your actual bill.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Redshift attributes cost to each query as if it ran alone on the cluster. If queries run concurrently, the sum of individual query costs may exceed your actual bill.
```
